README.md, before:

# IntelliFIM

The File Integrity Monitor (FIM) is a CLI tool designed to monitor directories for changes, view and reset baseline data, view logs, and analyze log files for anomalies. It includes user authentication to ensure that only authorized users can access and use the tool. Additionally, it takes a backup of the monitored directories before starting the monitoring process.

## Features

- **Monitor Directories**: Start monitoring single or multiple directories for changes in real-time.
- **View Baseline Data**: View the current baseline data stored in the database.
- **Reset Baseline Data**: Reset the baseline data for specified directories.
- **View Logs**: View log files generated during monitoring.
- **Analyze Logs**: Analyze log files for anomalies using machine learning models.
- **Exclude Files/Folders**: Exclude selected files and folders from monitoring.
- **User Authentication**: Ensure only authorized users can access and use the tool.
- **Backup**: Automatically back up monitored directories before starting the monitoring process.
- **Database Integration**: Store baseline data and file metadata in a MySQL database for efficient tracking and querying.

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:
    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/AdityaPatadiya/FIM.git
    cd FIM
    ```

2. Set up a Python virtual environment and install dependencies:
    ```sh
    python3 -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Set up the MySQL database:
    - `sudo mysql`
    - `SELECT user, host FROM mysql.user;`

    - ```
        CREATE USER 'fim_user'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'strong_password';
        GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'fim_user'@'localhost' WITH GRANT OPTION;
        FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
        ```
    - Update the `.env` file with your database credentials (see below).

## Configuration

### Create a `.env` file:
Create a `.env` file in the root directory with the following variables:
```
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_NAME=<your_database_name>
DB_USER=<your_database_user>
DB_PASSWORD=<your_database_password>
DB_POOL_SIZE=32
AUTH_DB_NAME=<your_auth_database_name>  # Database for authentication
PEPPER=<your_random_pepper_string>
```

## Usage

### Authentication
When you run the CLI tool, you will be prompted to authenticate. If you are a new user, you can register by providing a username and password. If you are an existing user, you can log in with your credentials. Authentication sessions last for 15 minutes.

### Command-Line Arguments
The CLI tool supports the following arguments:
- `--monitor`: Start monitoring one or more directories.
- `--view-baseline`: View the current baseline data stored in the database.
- `--reset-baseline`: Reset the baseline data for specified directories.
- `--view-logs`: View the log files generated during monitoring.
- `--analyze-logs`: Analyze log files for anomalies using machine learning.
- `--exclude`: Exclude specific files or folders from monitoring.
- `--dir`: Specify directories to monitor.

### Examples
1. **Monitor Directories**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --monitor --dir /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2
    ```
2. **View Baseline Data**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --view-baseline
    ```
3. **Reset Baseline Data**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --reset-baseline --dir /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2
    ```
4. **View Logs**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --view-logs
    ```
5. **Analyze Logs**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --analyze-logs
    ```
6. **Exclude Files/Folders**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --exclude /path/to/exclude
    ```

## Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection

The tool includes a machine learning module for detecting anomalies in log files:
- **Training**: Train an Isolation Forest model using log data.
    ```sh
    python src/utils/anomaly_detection.py
    ```
- **Analysis**: Analyze logs for anomalies using the trained model.
    ```sh
    python cli.py --analyze-logs
    ```

## Project Structure

```
File-Integrity-Monitor-FIM/
├── cli.py                     # Main CLI tool for the File Integrity Monitor
├── src/
│   ├── FIM/
│   │   ├── FIM.py             # Core functionality for monitoring changes
│   │   ├── fim_utils.py       # Utility methods for file integrity monitoring
│   ├── Authentication/
│   │   ├── Authentication.py  # Handles user authentication
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── backup.py          # Handles directory backups
│   │   ├── log_parser.py      # Parses log files into structured data
│   │   ├── anomaly_detection.py # Performs anomaly detection on log files
│   │   ├── database.py        # Manages database operations
├── config/
│   ├── logging_config.py      # Configures logging for monitored directories
├── logs/                      # Directory for storing log files
├── data/models/               # Directory for storing trained models
├── Example/                   # Contains the example files and folder for testing
├── requirements.txt           # Python dependencies
├── .env                       # Environment variables for database and authentication
└── README.md                  # Project documentation
```

## Logs

Log files are stored in the `logs/` directory. Each monitored directory has its own log file, named `FIM_<directory_name>.log`. Logs include timestamps, log levels, and messages about detected changes.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:
1. Fork the repository.
2. Create a new branch for your feature or bug fix.
3. Submit a pull request with a detailed description of your changes.

Commit message:

Revise README to include AI-driven IPS integration
Updated the description to reflect the integration of AI-driven IPS with FIM and Network Traffic Analysis.

README.md, after:

# IntelliFIM

An AI-driven Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) integrated with File Integrity Monitoring (FIM) and Network Traffic Analysis that detects and prevents insider threats through real-time anomaly detection, context-aware analysis, and adaptive automated response using Explainable AI (XAI).

## Features

- **Monitor Directories**: Start monitoring single or multiple directories for changes in real-time.
- **View Baseline Data**: View the current baseline data stored in the database.
- **Reset Baseline Data**: Reset the baseline data for specified directories.
- **View Logs**: View log files generated during monitoring.
- **Analyze Logs**: Analyze log files for anomalies using machine learning models.
- **Exclude Files/Folders**: Exclude selected files and folders from monitoring.
- **User Authentication**: Ensure only authorized users can access and use the tool.
- **Backup**: Automatically back up monitored directories before starting the monitoring process.
- **Database Integration**: Store baseline data and file metadata in a MySQL database for efficient tracking and querying.

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:
    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/AdityaPatadiya/FIM.git
    cd FIM
    ```

2. Set up a Python virtual environment and install dependencies:
    ```sh
    python3 -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Set up the MySQL database:
    - `sudo mysql`
    - `SELECT user, host FROM mysql.user;`

    - ```
        CREATE USER 'fim_user'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'strong_password';
        GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'fim_user'@'localhost' WITH GRANT OPTION;
        FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
        ```
    - Update the `.env` file with your database credentials (see below).

## Configuration

### Create a `.env` file:
Create a `.env` file in the root directory with the following variables:
```
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_NAME=<your_database_name>
DB_USER=<your_database_user>
DB_PASSWORD=<your_database_password>
DB_POOL_SIZE=32
AUTH_DB_NAME=<your_auth_database_name>  # Database for authentication
PEPPER=<your_random_pepper_string>
```

## Usage

### Authentication
When you run the CLI tool, you will be prompted to authenticate. If you are a new user, you can register by providing a username and password. If you are an existing user, you can log in with your credentials. Authentication sessions last for 15 minutes.

### Command-Line Arguments
The CLI tool supports the following arguments:
- `--monitor`: Start monitoring one or more directories.
- `--view-baseline`: View the current baseline data stored in the database.
- `--reset-baseline`: Reset the baseline data for specified directories.
- `--view-logs`: View the log files generated during monitoring.
- `--analyze-logs`: Analyze log files for anomalies using machine learning.
- `--exclude`: Exclude specific files or folders from monitoring.
- `--dir`: Specify directories to monitor.

### Examples
1. **Monitor Directories**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --monitor --dir /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2
    ```
2. **View Baseline Data**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --view-baseline
    ```
3. **Reset Baseline Data**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --reset-baseline --dir /path/to/dir1 /path/to/dir2
    ```
4. **View Logs**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --view-logs
    ```
5. **Analyze Logs**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --analyze-logs
    ```
6. **Exclude Files/Folders**:
    ```sh
    python cli.py --exclude /path/to/exclude
    ```

## Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection

The tool includes a machine learning module for detecting anomalies in log files:
- **Training**: Train an Isolation Forest model using log data.
    ```sh
    python src/utils/anomaly_detection.py
    ```
- **Analysis**: Analyze logs for anomalies using the trained model.
    ```sh
    python cli.py --analyze-logs
    ```

## Project Structure

```
File-Integrity-Monitor-FIM/
├── cli.py                     # Main CLI tool for the File Integrity Monitor
├── src/
│   ├── FIM/
│   │   ├── FIM.py             # Core functionality for monitoring changes
│   │   ├── fim_utils.py       # Utility methods for file integrity monitoring
│   ├── Authentication/
│   │   ├── Authentication.py  # Handles user authentication
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── backup.py          # Handles directory backups
│   │   ├── log_parser.py      # Parses log files into structured data
│   │   ├── anomaly_detection.py # Performs anomaly detection on log files
│   │   ├── database.py        # Manages database operations
├── config/
│   ├── logging_config.py      # Configures logging for monitored directories
├── logs/                      # Directory for storing log files
├── data/models/               # Directory for storing trained models
├── Example/                   # Contains the example files and folder for testing
├── requirements.txt           # Python dependencies
├── .env                       # Environment variables for database and authentication
└── README.md                  # Project documentation
```

## Logs

Log files are stored in the `logs/` directory. Each monitored directory has its own log file, named `FIM_<directory_name>.log`. Logs include timestamps, log levels, and messages about detected changes.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:
1. Fork the repository.
2. Create a new branch for your feature or bug fix.
3. Submit a pull request with a detailed description of your changes.
